Canned Tomatoes
5-6 cloves Garlic
Minced Fresh Ginger
Turmeric
Cayenne Pepper
Smoked Paprika
Kosher Salt
Garam Masala
Ground Cumin
Boneless Skinless Chicken Thighs, (or use skinless chicken breast, bone-in, or whatever works for you. If frozen, add 1-2 minutes to total time)
Butter cut into cubes, (use coconut oil if dairy-free)
Heavy Cream, (use full-fat coconut milk if dairy-free)
Garam Masala spice mix
chopped cilantro

Place tomatoes and all spices in the bottom of the Instant Pot.
￼
2. Add in chicken thighs or chicken breast. You do not need to add any water. The chicken and tomatoes alone will release a lot of water. If you have an 8-quart pressure cooker, you may ant to double the ingredients or add in 1/4 cup of water just to be cautious.
￼
3. This step is entirely optional--but very nifty. If you'd like to make basmati rice, or mashed cauliflower, you can cook them at the same time as the chicken for an easy Instant Pot recipe.

Place a metal trivet on top of the sauce. Then, you can use a small container with rice or with frozen riced cauliflower to go on top of it.

This is called Pot-in-Pot Cooking and I have a video here that will tell you all you need to know about how to do Pot in pot cooking.
￼
4. If you're cooking rice, add rice to a small container. Measure out the water and put that into the rice container. When you're using frozen riced cauliflower, you do not need to add water. The steam and heat alone will be enough to cook the cauliflower.

￼
5. Cook the butter chicken for 10 mins on high pressure. Allow it to release pressure naturally for an additional 10 minutes.

￼
6. Once you open the Instant Pot, the rice will be cooked to perfection. For mashed cauliflower, you can add butter, salt, and pepper and mash it in.

If you prefer a cauliflower and cheese dish with this, which, while not traditionally Indian AT ALL, is actually very good, check out this Instant Pot Cauliflower and Cheese Recipe.

￼
7. At this point, remove the chicken and set it aside. You will be adding things and blending the sauce into a tomato puree--and you don't want blended chicken in your Butter Chicken.

￼
8. Add butter, cream, and 1 additional teaspoon of garam masala.

You are doing this after the tomato sauce has cooked because pressure cooking causes butter and heavy cream to separate into a greasy mess. Adding it afterward allows the fat to emulsify properly into the sauce, resulting in utter deliciousness.

The additional teaspoon of garam masala is to add fragrance to the dish before serving.w
