Instant Pot Chicken Tortilla Soup

Description
A fast and flavorful recipe that can be made using dry or canned beans, and using fresh or frozen thighs, or breast meat. Very adaptable! Very easy.

Ingredients
1–2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion, diced
5 garlic cloves, rough chopped (or sub 1–2 tablespoons granulated garlic)
1–2 cups carrots, diced
1 cup celery, diced
1 x 14.5 ounce can diced tomatoes, and juices ( preferably fire roasted) or 1 ½ cups diced tomatoes w/juices
1  small 4-ounce can, mild green chilies (or sub 1 poblano chili, diced)
2 lbs chicken thighs (boneless, skinless, fresh or frozen) left whole (or breasts -see cooking notes)
1 cup dry black beans or sub 1-2 cans black beans, or sub corn-see notes ( do not use dry beans with chicken breast as breasts will overcook.)
4 cups chicken stock or broth (or water with 4 chicken bouillon cubes)
2 cups water
2 teaspoons salt, more to taste
2 teaspoons cumin
2 teaspoons chili powder
1 teaspoon dried oregano
juice from 1–2 limes

Optional: for a smoky heat, add a little chipotle (either the adobo sauce from canned chipotles, or a little ground chipotle powder to taste. )

Garnish with any or all of the following:  tortilla strips, grated cheese, sour cream, avocado, hot sauce, cilantro, fresh jalapeño, scallions

instructions

Set the Instant pot to the Saute function. Saute onions in the oil for 3-4 minutes while you prep the garlic, carrots and celery. Add them to the pot, and saute 3-4 minutes. (If using granulated garlic, add later with the spices)

Add the diced tomato and their juices, green chilies, chicken thighs (whole), dry black beans ( or canned, drained), chicken stock, water, salt and all the spices.  Give a good stir, and set the Instant pot to pressure cook on high. If using dry black beans, pressure cook 25 minutes. If using canned black beans, pressure cook for 14 minutes (same for either fresh or frozen thighs).

Manually let the pressure out, covering steam with a kitchen towel. (Or feel free to let the pressure release naturally.)

Shred chicken thighs with two forks (either right in the pot, or on a cutting board). The soup will thicken. (At this point you could add corn, and return to saute setting for a few minutes.) Squeeze with a generous amount of lime juice and taste for salt, adding more if necessary- especially if you used dry beans, you will need to add more. You want a good balance between lime and salt. ( If the soup tastes bland, it probably needs more of each.)

Divide among bowls and top with tortilla strips, cheese, sour cream, scallions or avocado and cilantro. Add hot sauce for added heat.

Enjoy!

For a more brothy soup, use only 1 can of beans vs. two. ( I prefer this brothy.)
